This video we'll learn about the weak pointer the weak pointer provides the non owning or weak reference
to a shared managed object like a shared pointer a weak pointer points to an object on the heap.
But unlike a shared pointer it doesn't participate in the owning relationship weak pointers are always
created from shared pointers and since weak pointers are not only references they do not affect the
reference count for the managed object.
So weak pointers don't affect the lifetime of the objects they're pointing to.
There are a few use cases for the weak pointer.
One is to prevent strong reference cycles between two objects.
We'll see this visually in the next slide.
Another use case is when we have a pointer that we use to temporarily reference another object something
like an iterator pointer that traverses a list of nodes it really doesn't own them just visit's them
temporarily.
Let's see the problem with strong circular references.
Sometimes when we design programs we may have two classes where each class refers to the other.
This implies a one to one relationship between the classes.
And this will be reflected in the class objects when we instantiate them.
In this case we have two objects A and B which are instantiated from two different classes.
Notice that A has a shared pointer to a B and B has a shared pointer today.
Now we have a bit of a chicken and egg problem.
When they go out of scope they will be destroyed from the stack but they're shared resources on the
heap will not be destroyed and will leak memory keeps me alive and keeps alive.
This is exactly where the weak pointer comes in.
Let's see now we need to decide who owns who.
Let's say that a owns B.
Then we replace the shared pointer and B with a weak pointer and now everything works as expected and
we don't need memory in the next video.
We'll complete the section with a brief introduction to custom the leaders for smart pointers.
But first let's head over to the idea and see this example in life code.
Ok so I'm back in the idea.
I mean the Section 17 workspace in the week pointer's project and what we'll do here is we'll do that
Semb example that we did visually in the slides where I've got an A reference A B and A B reference
CNA and we've got that strong circular reference that we can't break.
So let's take a look at how we do this.
First of all you can see that I've got a class A declared right here on line tend to 17.
And the class A has a shared pointer to a B.
Now since we haven't seen the B yet we need to put this forward declaration in here.
I'm not sure if we've done that in class before or not but since the compiler needs to know about A
B we're just simply saying hey you know what compiler.
I've got a class B declared later.
Just assume it's here.
It's similar to a function prototype in a sense that just tells the compiler don't worry about it.
You'll see this later.
So in this case again the class A has a shared pointer to a B.
And here's my set method that just sets that pointer.
It's got a real simple constructor and destructor that just simply display you know when they're called
so we can see them actually being called.
And then my class B is defined down here and the class B has a shared pointer to an A.
So there's that relationship between the two right.
So an aone to B and B owns an age of that.
That's the problem that we have.
And here's my set method that sets that a pointer.
And again my constructor.
So really really simple.
Let's take a look at the main and you can see the main here on line 31.
I create that a shared pointer using make shared and 9:32 I create to be shared pointer using make shared.
Then right here I'm going to say set the be part of a to b and set the A part of b to say that's establishing
that circular reference.
So what happens here is.
Here's my a here's my b remember these are shared pointers.
So we've basically got a pointer here and a pointer here.
Remember it's a shared pointer so this is just an object and this guy's pointing to an object on the
heap.
This guy's pointing to a B object on the heap and what we just did here is we did this.
He points to that one and this guy points to that.
OK so you can see the problem.
This guy has a reference count of one.
Or use count of 1.
This guy has a use count of 1.
So what happens when a and b go out of scope while Ed goes out of scope and he tries to destroy this
piece here right.
But it notices that something else is referencing and so it's not zero.
So it's not going to destroy it.
Same thing with B.
So what ends up happening is what actually gets destroyed is a and b that are on the on the stack right
to shared pointers but not the area on the heap and there is your memory leak right so all this is going
to leak and we've got no way to get to it.
So that's the problem and the problem is because of this implied shared ownership.
So the fix is really simple.
The fix is that using a pointer.
So we determine who owns what.
Let's just assume that we're going to change this guy right here and actually let me run this you can
actually see the leak build and run and there's the run you can see the constructor today I constructed
a beep at the destructors.
Never got called because we leaked the memory.
That's what we want is we want a constructor of B's constructor that we want obviously destructors for
both of them being called.
OK so let's do that.
So what we can do is you can see the comment right here.
Make it weak to break that strong circular reference and that's exactly what we're going to do.
We're going to come right here.
We're going to make this shared pointer a weak pointer that won't affect the reference count.
So now when we run this you can see a constructor that B constructor than the the destructors being
called.
Now we're no longer leaking memory so this is a real real common use case for the weak pointer and this
kind of stuff happens more often than you would think.
When you've got very complex data structures and graphs and you're traversing and doing all kinds of
manipulation it's very possible you can end up with strong circular references like these and the weak
pointers the solution.